Adhabu ya kaburi aijua maiti, The touture of the grave is only known by the corpse
Akiba haiozi, A reserve will not decay
Asifuye mvuwa imemnyea. He who praises rain has been rained on.
Akili nyingi huondowa maarifa. Great wit drives away wisdom
Asiye kubali kushindwa si mshindani.He who does not admit defeat is not a sportsman
Atangaye na jua hujuwa. He wanders around by day a lot, learns a lot
Asiye kuwapo na lake halipo.If you are absent you lose your share
Avumaye baharini papa kumbe wengi wapo.Shark is the famous one in sea the but they many others
Baada ya dhiki faraja.After hardship comes relief.
Baniani mbaya kiatu chake dawa.An evil Indian but his bussiness is good.
Bendera hufuata upepo. A flag follows the direction of the wind.
Bilisi wa mtu ni mtu.The evil spirit of a man is a man.
Chamlevi huliwa na mgema.The drunkard's money is being consumed by palm-wine trapper.
Chanda chema huvikwa pete.A handsome finger gets the ring.
Chombo cha kuzama hakina usukani. A sinking vessel needs no navigation.
Chovya - chovya yamaliza buyu la asali. Constant dipping will empty goud of honey
Dalili ya mvua mawingu. Clouds are the sign of rain
Damu nzito kuliko maji.Blood is thicker than water
Dawa ya moto ni moto. the remedy of fire is fire
Dua la kuku halimpati mwewe.the curse of the fowl does not bother the kite.
Fadhila ya punda ni mateke. Gratitude of a donkey is a kick.
Fimbo ya mbali hayiuwi nyoka. A wepon which you don't have in hand wont kill a snake.
Fuata nyuki ule asali.Follow bees and you will get honey
Fumbo mfumbe mjinga mwerevu huligangua.Put a riddle to a fool a clever person will solve it
Ganda la mua la jana chungu kaona kivuno.The skin of yesteday's sugarcane is a havest to an ant.
Haba na haba hujaza kibaba.Little by little fills up the measure.
Hapana marefu yasio na mwisho.They is no distance that has no end.
Hakuna siri ya watu wawili.They is no secret between two people.
Haraka haraka haina baraka.Hurry hurry has no blessings
Hasira, hasara.Anger brings loss(Damage)
Heri kufa macho kuliko kufa moyo.It is better to lose your eyes than to lose your heart.
Heri kujikwa kidole kuliko ulimi.Better to stumble with toe than toungue.
Hiari ya shinda utumwa.Voluntary is better than force.
Hucheka kovu asiye kuwa na jeraha.He laughs at scar who has received no wound.
Ihsani (hisani)haiozi.Kindness does not go rotten.
Ikiwa hujui kufa,tazama kaburi.If you don't know death look at the grave.
Jina jema hungara gizani.A good name shines in the dark.
Jino la pembe si dawa ya pengo.An ivory tooth is not cure for the lost tooth.
Jitihadi haiondoi kudura. Effort will not counter faith.
Jogoo la shamba haliwiki mjini. The village cock does not crow in town.
Kafiri akufaye si Isilamu asiyekufa.An infidel who does you good turn is not like a Muslim who does not
Kamba hukatika pabovu. A rope parts where it is thinnest.
Kanga hazai ugenini.A guine- fowl not lay eggs on strange places
Kawaida ni kama sheria.Usage is like law
Kawia ufike.Better delay and get there.
Kazi mbaya siyo mchezo mwema.A bad job is not as wothless as a good game
Kelele za mlango haziniwasi usingizi.The creaking of the door deprives me of no sleep.
Kenda karibu na kumi.Nine is near ten.
Kiburi si maungwana.Arrogance is not gentlemanly.
Kichango kuchangizana.Everyone should contribute when collection is made.
Kidole kimoja hakivunji chawa.One finger canot kill a louse.
Kingiacho mjini si haramu.That is fashionable in town is never prohibited.
Kikulacho ki nguoni mwako.That which eats you up is in your clothing.
Kila chombo kwa wimblile.Every vessel has its own waves
Kila mlango na ufunguwo wake.Every door with its own key
Kila mtoto na koja lake.To every child his own neck ornament
Kila mwamba ngoma ,ngozi huivuta kwake.Every who streches a skin on a drum,pulls the skin own his own side.
Kila ndege huruka na mbawa zake.Every bird flies with its own wings.
Kilio huanza mfiwa ndipo wa mbali wakaingia.The beareved begins the wailing latter others join.
Kimya kingi kina mshindo mkubwa.Along silence followed by mighty noise.
Kinga na kinga ndipo moto uwakapo.One fire brand after another keeps fire burning.
Kinyozi hajinyoi.A barber does not shave himself.
Kinywa ni jumba la maneno.Mouth is the home of words.
Kipendacho moyo ni dawa.What the heart desires is medicine to it.
Kipya kinyemi ingawa kidonda. A new thing is a souce of joy even if is sore.
Kisebusebu na roho kipapo.Refusing and wanting at the same time.
Kisokula mlimwengu,sera nale.what is not eaten by a man,let the devil eat it.
Kitanda usicho kilala hujui kunguni wake.You canot know the bugs of a bed that you have not lain on.
Kivuli cha fimbo hakimfichi mtu jua.Shadow of a stick canot protect one from the sun.
Kiwi cha yule ni chema cha;hata ulimwengu uwishe. The blindnes of that one is his good fortune
Kizuri chajiuza kibaya chajitembeza.A good thing sells it self a bad one advertises it self
Konzo ya maji haifumbatiki. A handfull of water can not be grasped.
Kosa moja haliachi mke.One fault does not warrant divorce of a wife
Kozi mwandada ,kulala na njaa kupenda.A goshawk is an egg child,if sleeps hungry its his own fault.
Kuagiza kufyekeza. ie One eye of a master sees more than four of a servent.
Kuambizana kuko kusikilizana hapana.Giving advice but no one listens.
Kucha M'ngu si kilemba cheupe.The fear of God is not wearing a white turban.
Kuchamba kwingi,kuondoka na mavi.Leave well alone! You wont improve matters by going on tinkering
Kufa kufaana.Death has its advantages too ie it benifits those who inherit.
Kufa kwa jamaa, harusi.The death of not a relative is a wedding.Compared to a death of a relative
Kufa kwa mdomo,mate hutawanyika.When the head of the family dies,that family breaks up.
Kuishi kwingi ni kuona mengi. To live long is to see much.
Kujikwa si kuanguka,bali ni kwenda mbele.To stumble is not falling down but it is to go forward.
Kukopa harusi kulipa matanga.Borrowing is like a wedding ,repaying is like mourning.
Kuku havunji yai lake.A hen does not break her own eggs.
Kuku mgeni hakosi kamba mguuni.A new fowl always has string around its legs.
Kula kutamu ,kulima mavune.Eating is sweet ,digging is weariness.
Kulea mimba si kazi kazi kulea mwana.It is not hard to nurse a pregnency,but it is hard to bring up a child.
Kunako matanga kume kufa mtu.Where they is mourning someone has died.
Kunguru mwoga hukimbiza mbawa zake.The timid crow withdraws his wings from harm.
Kupanda mchongoma ,kushuka ngoma.You may climb a thorn tree,and be unable to come down.
Kupoteya njia ndiyo kujua njia.To get lost is to learn the way.
Kutoa ni moyo usambe ni utajiri.Charity is the matter of the heart not of the pocket.
Kutu kuu ni la mgeni.Old rust is for the stranger.
Kuzima koleo si mwisho wa uhunzi.Cooling the tongs is not end of forging.
Kwa mwoga huenda kicheko na kwa shujaa huenda kilio.i.e.timidity often ends in a laugh, bravado in a lament.
Kwenda mbio siyo kufika.To run is not neccessarily to arrive.
Kwenye miti hakuna wajenzi.Where there trees,there are no builders.
La kuvunda(kuvunja) halina rubani. A vessel running agroud has no captain.
La kuvunda (kuvunja)halina ubani.They is no incence for something rotting.
Lake mtu halimtapishi bali humchefusha.One's foul smelling does not sicken one self but merely disguts one.
Leo ni leo asemayo kesho ni mwongo.Today is today who says tommorrow is a liar
Liandikwalo ndiyo liwalo.That which is written by God is what is.
Lila na fila hazitangamani.Good and evil will never mix.
Lipitalo ,hupishwa .Things dont just happen by accidents
Lisemwalo lipo,ikiwa halipo laja.What is benig talked about is here,and if its not it's comming around behind.
Lisilokuwapo moyoni,halipo machoni.Out of sight out of mind.
Maafuu hapatilizwi.You dont take viengeance on silliness.
Macho hayana pazia.Eyes have no screens,they see all that is within view.
Mafahali wawili hawakai zizi moja.Two bulls do not live in the same shade.
Maiti haulizwi sanda.A dead person is not asked for a shroud.
Maji hufuata mkondo.water follows current.i.e.swim with current.
Maji huteremka bondeni,hayapandi mlima.Water flows down the valley does not climb the hill.
Maji ukiyavuliya nguo huna budi kuyaogelea.If you take of your clothes for water you must bathe.
Maji usiyoyafika hujui wingi wake.You can not know the extent of water in a pond that you have never been to.
Maji ya kifufu ni bahari ya chungu.Water in a coconut shell is like an ocean to an ant.
Maji yakija hupwa.When tide is high,it ebbs.
Mpanda ngazi hushuka.He who climbs a ladder comes down again.i.e.What goes up must come down
Maji yakimwagika hayazoleki.If water is split,it can not be gathered up.
Majumba makubwa husitiri mambo.Big houses conceal a lot.
Majuto ni mjukuu.Regrets are like a child,They come some considerable time after event.
Manahodha wengi chombo huenda mrama.With many captains,the ship does not sail properly.i.e.Too many cooks spoil the broth.
Maneno makali hayavunji mfupa.Words alone wont break bones.
Maneno mema hutowa nyoka pangoni.Pleasent words will draw the snake from its hole.
Masikini akipata matako hulia mbwata.When a poor man gets something he boasts of his new wealth.
Masikini haokoti,akiokota huambiwa kaiba.A poor man does not pick up things if does they say he stole them.
Masikini na mwanawe tajiri na mali yake.A por man with his child a rich man with his wealth.
Mavi usioyala,wayawingiani kuku? Why drive away fowls from the dung you do not eat yourself?
Mavi ya kale hayanuki.Old droppings do not stink.
Mbinu hufuata mwendo.A double jointed arm follows the leg action.i.e Like father like son.
Mbio za sakafuni huishia ukingoni.Running on the roof finishes at the edge.
Mbiu za mgambo ikilia kuna jambo.When an oxhorn of a news man is sounded,something is wrong.
Mchagua jembe si mkulima.One who selects his hoe is not real farmer.
Mchagua nazi hupata koroma.He who selects coconut with great care ends up getting a bad coconut
Mchakacho ujao,halulengwi na jiwe.You dont throw stones at an approching craclin noise in the bush wait and see what is it first
Mchama ago hanyeli,huenda akauya papo.A traveller does not make a mess where he had made a camp as he might one day come back.
Mchelea mwana kulia hulia yeye..He who fears the crying of a child,will cry himself.
Mchele moja mapishi mengi. Rice is all one but they are many ways of cooking it.
Mcheka kilema hafi bila kumpata.He who laughs at a cripple will not die without becoming himself
Mcheza hawi kiwete,ngoma yataka matao.A dancer will not become crippled for dancing calls for grace.
Mcheza kwao hutuzwa.He who dances at home will be rewarded.
Mcheza na tope humrukia.He who plays with mud will get splashed.
